# Releases

This page is to help core developers in releasing a new version of `aeon`.

Core developers making a release should have write access to the repository.

`aeon` aims for a release every one or two months currently, based on the amount of
new content available for the release.

## Preparing the release version

The release process is as follows, on high-level:

1. **Ensure deprecation actions are carried out.**
  Deprecation actions for a version should be marked by "version number" annotated
  comments in the code. E.g., for the release `0.10.0`, search for the string `0.10.0`
  in the code and carry out described deprecation actions. PRs performign deprecation
  actions should start with [DEP] and use the `deprecation` label. So they are put
  under the "Deprecations" section in the release notes.

2. **Create a "release" pull request.**
  Create a branch from main and PR named after the release version. This should make
  changes to the version numbers (root `__init__.py`, `README.md` and `pyproject.toml`)
  and have complete release notes in the [changelog](https://www.aeon-toolkit.org/en/latest/changelog.html)
  webpage. See the [release notes](#release-notes) section for more details.

3. **Merge the "release" pull request.**
  This PR should ideally be the final PR made before the release with the exception of
  any necessary troubleshooting PRs. The PR and release notes should optimally be
  reviewed by multiple core developers, then merged once tests pass.

4. **Create the GitHub release.**
  This release should create a new tag following the syntax v[MAJOR].[MINOR].[PATCH],
  e.g., the string `v0.10.0` for version `0.10.0`. The release name should similarly be
  `aeon v0.10.0`.  The GitHub release notes should contain only "hightlights",
  "new contributors" and "all contributors" sections, and otherwise link to the release
  notes in the changelog, following the pattern of current GitHub release notes. The
  full GitHub commit log between releases can also be included.

## `pypi` release and release validation

Creation of the GitHub release trigger the `pypi` release workflow.

5. **Wait for the ``pypi`` release CI/CD to finish.**
  If tests fail due to sporadic unrelated failure, restart. If tests fail genuinely,
  something went wrong in the above steps, investigate, fix, and repeat. If the bug
  is known and sporadic (i.e. failure to read data from an external source), the release
  workflow can be restarted. It is not necessary to create a new GitHub release, and
  the workflow can be manually run from the GitHub Actions tab if more PRs are
  required.

6. **Release workflow completion tasks.**
  Once the release workflow has passed, check `aeon` version on `pypi`, this should be
  the new version. A validatory installation of `aeon` in a new Python environment
  should be carried out according to the installation instructions. If the installation
  does not succeed or wheels have not been uploaded, action to diagnose and remedy must
  be taken.

## `conda-forge` release and release validation

7. **Merge the ``conda-forge`` release PR.**
  After some time a PR will be automatically created in the [aeon conda-forge feedstock](https://github.com/conda-forge/aeon-feedstock).
  Follow the instructions in the PR to merge it, making sure to update any dependencies
  that have changed and dependency version bounds.

## Release notes

Generally, [release notes](#changelog) should follow the general pattern of previous
release notes. The initial change notes can be generated by running [.github/utilities/changelog_generator.py](https://github.com/aeon-toolkit/aeon/blob/main/.github/utilities/changelog_generator.py).
Pull requests will be put into sections in the release notes based on the labels,
so ensure that the PRs are labelled correctly.

After generating the initial release notes, make sure to:
- Add the release version and month/year of the release at the top of the release notes
- Add any important announcements at the top of the release notes if applicable
- Add release highlights section
- Tidy the auto-generated PR list, moving PRs as necessary so they are correctly
categorised. It may be easier to re-label PRs and regenerate the release notes.
- Ensure the contributors section is correct

## Emergency release workflow

If a release is required urgently, the release testing process can be expedited by
running the "Fast release" workflow. **This workflow should not be used under normal
circumstances**. Any issues with release testing should be addressed in the normal
release workflow if possible. Consult the core developers on Slack before running this
in any circumstance.
